and so the basic problem if you're
suffering everyday in life is that you
haven't been taught how to live it and
you haven't asked the question what is
the source of my
[Music]
suffering why do people choose to live
life when most of it is just suffering I
need this answer I need to know hello
all for the past 2 years I've been
struggling to answer this one question
why do people choose to live despite it
all when I look at everyone's Liv around
me I'm just so stunned for most people
life is nothing more than a cycle of
working your ass off all day so that you
can make enough money to feed yourself
so that you can wake up the next day to
repeat the same thing again and again
and again until you die and I have not
been able to cope with this not at all
this question struck me hard two years
ago back when I was 16 the time during
which I would start studying for college
entrance exams I studied all the time
I'm an Indian so it's harder here
eventually I looked at my future and I
was horrified nothing but working to
live the next day to then work for the
next and the worst part of all this is
that I'm one of the few who have it good
I just can't imagine others poor
countries where people have to work even
harder or War torn countries even the
countries which I felt would have been
my salvation like the United States seem
to be getting crushed under inflation
there's nowhere to run from my fate no
hope in the past it was even worse
slavery was a thing slaves actually
chose to live why why why did they
choose to live why do the Chinese who
work the entire day choose to live
somebody please tell me right now my
life is a bit on ease and but I can't
imagine how I will cope with the idea of
being alive once I get a job if I can
get one I'll probably kill myself o
that's scary so please don't do that and
you know if y'all are having thoughts of
suicidality please go see a licensed
professional or call Emergency Services
but let's start with this basic premise
right like why on Earth should I live if
life is suffering hey y'all I want to
take a second to talk about HG coaching
and y'all may be wondering oh my God bro
like I don't want to talk about coaching
I just want to watch YouTube videos
because there's a part of your brain
that recognizes that you need to do
better in life but you don't actually
want to invest the time in energy you
just want to sit there and watch another
YouTube video which is exactly why I
developed a coaching program because I
realized the problem that we have today
is not that we don't know what to do
it's that we don't really understand how
we work and how to get ourselves to
actually do things and the reason I
developed a coaching program is so that
12 weeks from now you can actually have
made progress we've shown that people
improve in their sense of life purpose
by about 58% and a 25 to 45% reduction
in depression and anxiety the reason we
made a coaching program isn't because
you can't DIY it it's because if you
want to have made significant progress 3
months from now you're going to need
help doing it so if you're interested
check out the link in the description
below and if you're still not ready yet
totally fine that's why we literally
have 800 YouTube videos because for many
people it's about a SLO I wake up today
I work really hard and I work really
hard and then I go to go home I feed
myself and then I go to bed so that I
can have more energy to work tomorrow
I'm in a highly competitive testing
environment where everyone is cramming
all the time and what's the point it
sucks to cram I don't want to learn this
stuff but I have to because my future
depends on it and this person even says
so of us will try to cope with this
reality of life is suffering and I can't
cope anymore well yeah coping ain't
going to work so if you all want to
understand how do you live life if it is
fundamentally suffering and why should
we do this the reason you should do it
is because you can get better at it and
the reason that life is suffering is
because you suck at living it I know
that sounds kind of not compassionate
but that's how it is let me give youall
a simple example I can throw some
someone into a swimming pool and their
experience is I'm struggling to stay
afloat oh my God this is awful I can
barely breathe I'm trying to cope with
the fact that I don't know how to swim
and I'm in a body of water why on Earth
should I stay in this body of water this
is awful yes you are correct being in a
body of water sucks if you don't know
how to swim and coping is not the answer
the basic problem is that we are not
taught how to swim in life we are not
taught how to live life because if all
your life is subsisting today so that
you can continue to subsist tomorrow
that ain't going to work now sometimes
so let's start with a couple of Basics
the first is that we all have a core
need for survival and theoretically
procreation so this is a basic human
Drive where if you look at a bacteria a
bacteria is trying to to live to
procreate so we have this core reason to
stay alive which is just because we're
designed to right we prefer life over
death as human beings as all animals as
all living things they don't even need
to be animals they strive to survive so
what's happened in the past I don't know
20 30 40 years is that the drive to
survive is no longer sufficient to keep
us in the game because life has started
to suck so much this is where people
will say but Dr K what are you talking
about there's been so much advancement
and I agree there's been a lot of
advancement and a lot of good stuff
that's happened think we're better off
today than we used to be but we are
swimming in different Waters and
survival used to be sufficient because
in some ways survival was easier and I
know it sounds kind of weird but like if
you look at hunter gatherer societies
how many hours a day do hunter gatherers
work they kind of work six maybe eight
hours a day their life is pretty chill
they don't have to worry about mortgages
at the end of the month they don't have
to worry about oh my God if I get a B on
this test in my sixth month of
University how will it affect my job
prospects 4 years from now so a couple
of fundamental things have changed
objectively things in some ways are
better for example people used to starve
to death and some very unlucky people
still do but generally speaking obesity
causes more death than starvation does
which is wild right think about that for
a second we have essentially won the
game of surviving life and we have won
the trophy of suffering as a result
because survival used to be enough to
drive us used to be enough of a reason
to do something because if we didn't do
it we didn't eat and we didn't survive
and so now the game has changed the main
quest is different and now the very
things that we have been wired to do are
the things that harm us I love fatty
carbohydrate dense food as does every
human being on the planet because that
helped us survive now that love kills
you literally so that which we were
wired to do no longer works because the
world has changed and the world has
changed more rapidly over the last 30 or
40 years because if we look at the rate
of change in the world is increasing how
much technological advancement happened
between the years 430 CE and 600 CE not
very much what was the world like in
1850 compared to what it is now
completely transformed you could take a
human being from the world in 1850 and
drop them into today and they would be
so confused what is this guy doing he is
talking to an image of himself and there
are these weird lights and he's like
talking as if he's interacting with
people but there's no one in the room so
the world has fundamentally changed and
we have not been taught how to live in
it and you can't cope with this you just
have to learn how to live and so then
the question becomes how do you learn
how to live cuz they don't teach us that
right so this is a core problem in the
past our education was based on external
things because that's what we needed to
survive this is how you farm this is how
you do mathematics this is how you read
but now we have tools that do all that
stuff we have this thing called a
calculator we have programs that will do
your taxes for you we have audio books
and we can look up anything at the drop
of a hat right we can search anything on
Wikipedia and have all the information
at our fingertips so our educational
system has not kept up because now what
we need more than ever is to understand
how to live not be successful how to
live and so this is where spirituality
comes in because I think the most
successful study on how to live is what
I would call spirituality so if you you
describe different branches of knowledge
so what is like mathematics what is
psychology right so mathematics is the
study of math or not study it's it's ma
it's mathematics I guess mathology would
be the study of math but and in
Psychology this is where we get another
thing that's kind of tripped up so
psychology is not about understand
understanding yourself it is about
understanding the external behavior of
humans how do human beings in general
function right it's kind of like
economics it's not like there's a big
difference between personal finance and
economics economics is money on a big
scale personal finance is personal it's
money on a small scale and we even
called the field I work in finance that
doesn't mean you do personal finance
that means you work in like banking
right so we we add the word personal so
personal psychology is Spirit uality
because if you go to get a degree in
Psychology they're not going to teach
you how to wake up in the morning
they're not going to teach you how to
find motivation in your own life they
literally will not teach you that they
will teach you core psychological
principles like pavlovian responses this
is what we understand about human
behavior this is what we understand
about sadness not your sadness but
people's sadness so spirituality is the
discipline of understanding yourself
that has nothing to do with God so even
if you're an atheist this is why you
should engage in spirituality if you're
religious or an atheist both people
should engage in spirituality because
spirituality is the study of the self
that's how I'm defining it now a lot of
people may say but hold on a second like
isn't psychology and biology and
whatever sufficient I don't think so
because learning about how human beings
develop cravings and learning about the
science of digestion doesn't necessarily
allow you to choose a salad instead of
like a fried whatever the [__] and so
the basic problem if you're suffering
everyday in life is that you haven't
been taught how to live it and you
haven't asked the question what is the
source of my suffering and people will
say okay I have to work every day and
studying for this test is the source of
my suffering that's not the source of
your suffering your suffering comes from
your reaction to those circumstances
does everyone who studies every day
suffer the answer is no in fact some
people love it and don't you wish you
were like them I study more on a daily
basis today than I did at any point in
my life prior to like the last two years
so this is an example of something that
I went through over the course of a
month all right this is a gigantic pile
of paper so studying isn't what causes
suffering it is your reaction to
studying and the number one reason that
people suffer is because they do things
that they should because your whole life
you've been taught that you should do
this and you should do this and you
should do this and you don't want to and
so then what happens is there's
something in here which doesn't want to
and there's something out there telling
you to do something else and how do you
reconcile to these two things you bury
this you bury a part of yourself you
stop paying attention you numb out and
what you are literally doing is burying
a part of you that strives for something
and then we're confused why we suffer
the reason you suffer is because you're
not living your life you are living a
life that is prescribed by other people
no wonder you suffer cuz you're not
living the life that you want you're
literally literally you're literally
living someone else's ideal idea of a
life and it's not even one person right
it's some [__] Franken steinan
amalgamation of what we should do
because then you get in this educational
system where the goal isn't even
learning anymore can you'all believe
that right and this person was from
India so like I I'll tell youall just
random tangent so I was looking at some
statistics the most successful companies
in the world and I was really surprised
because if you kind of look at like
developed Nations right the US and parts
of Europe like Germany like China they
have these like awesome gigantic
conglomerates that are doing like very
revolutionary and groundbreaking work
and India is falling behind same amount
of people as China roughly but Indian
companies don't do as well on the global
stage right and maybe that's incorrect
I'm not trying to dis India but then I
started to wonder why I was like wait a
second like we're just as smart we're
just as capable we have just as many
people we've got awesome colle and
institutions why is there a per capita
disproportion in like the number of
leading Indian companies and it's
because of the way that we Foster
creativity or don't Foster creativity
right learning is all about cramming
cramming cramming cramming cramming
instead of actually learning it's about
rot memorization and what we're also
starting to see is like these very or
not starting these have been there
forever very hierarchical power
structures and as we as human beings
start living in in situations where you
know I I'm involved in a company and
there are people older than me who
report to me this is something that is
very common in the United States much
rarer in India so the reason that we
suffer is because we're trying to exist
in a world that demands other things of
us and we quiet down our internal
thoughts and we ignore them and then
once you disconnect from yourself of
course life is going to be suffering
because when life is good is when you're
connected with yourself when you get to
feel and be and do something right I was
talking to a patient of mine who is
perpetually high on marijuana
perpetually constant use of Edibles and
on top of that smokes throughout the day
and I was talking to them about why do
you do this and they kind of told me
that like the more I talk to them the
more I realize that they feel connected
to themselves when they're high they can
taste food better they can hear music
better their social anxieties start to
disappear they stop worrying about the
outside world and think about that for a
second this person's s SCE of Happiness
contentment is about disconnecting from
the outside world and reconnecting to
yourself This is the essence of
spirituality so some people will use
drugs to do it you don't need to it can
be taught and so if you're suffering in
life because you're unhappy with your
situation do something else and this is
where you will say I can't why not
because because what because people will
be upset how will I be able to pay my
rent how will I be able to do this how
will I be able to do this that's a good
question question I don't know the
answer to that so if you don't know how
to do something are you going to try and
figure it out or if you can't see the
road from A to Z are you never going to
take the first step and this is what
happens we are a society that is
becoming increasingly risk averse and
we're told follow this path follow this
path follow this path and you'll be
happy you'll be happy you'll be happy
you'll be happy and then you ask the
question when the answer is always the
same later when will you be happy when
the exam's are over I'm still not happy
yet when you're done with school when
you get a good job you get a good job
now I just grind at work every day when
you're the boss even when you're the
boss you're so stressed out all the time
later later later later later so
spirituality is the practice of living
today not about the future not about the
past living today these are the core
Central tenants of spirituality number
one that happiness comes from within
people may think it comes from without
but this is the wild thing you may say
but no but my happiness comes from the
enjoyment of external things okay so
yall got to understand this that is
wrong you'll say no but I like apples
okay let me ask you a question where
does the experience of liking happen
liking apples happen where do you like
apples I like it in here do you all get
that no material object carries pleasure
pleasure comes from your reaction to an
object this fundamental thing we do not
understand oh I love playing this video
game it's so much fun and on hour six I
don't know why the [__] I play this
video game it's not even fun the game is
the same game hasn't changed you had
Smurfs on your team in game one you had
Smurfs on the enemy team in Games 2 3 4
5 and
six crazy thing there was never a Smurf
you just thought there was right cuz
surely when you're getting dumpstered
it's because there's an enemy Smurf do y
all see that so this is the key thing to
understand all enjoyment comes from
within literally you cannot enjoy
something outside of yourself it's
impossible physically existentially you
cannot enjoy something outside of
yourself well no that's wrong I'm my my
brother or sister got married recently
and I'm happy for them where do you
experience the happiness it's in here
first tenant of spirituality joy and
happiness and suffering all come from in
here once you discover that a lot of
things start to change so now what you
can do is there are external events
right studying for a test which then get
translated into your internal being
there is a system of translation and
then you can modify that sum right so
now this is what things get really
interesting because how much can you
modify an external event to create a
differential response within you so
let's start with 50/50 but honestly the
answer is close to 99 or even 100% you
can absolutely do that and people may be
confused about that but we actually know
this clinically so when we have someone
who is depressed and suicidal we know
that there are different kinds of coping
mechanisms so the most basic kind of
coping mechanism which is not very
healthy in the long run is emotion
focused coping and what that means is
when I feel something bad in here I'm
going to do something to numb these
emotions and make the Badness go away
doesn't help the most successful kind of
coping mechanism and by successful what
I mean is leads to good outcomes for
people like objectively and subjectively
so they feel better and they do better
top of the list is something called
cognitive reframing and as therapists as
psychiatrists we will literally go into
our office for 7 hours a day and teach
people how to do this what does
cognitive reframing mean does it mean
fixing your problems no it means
changing the way that you think about
them it's not changing anything on the
external it is changing on the internal
that process traditionally is what we
call spirituality so you can modify
whatever comes in and this is where I
will leave you with the most basic tool
of spirituality the only thing that you
need which will get you all the way from
zero to a thousand which is look within
yourself all you need everything else is
a permutation or combination or fancy
way of looking within yourself so if you
are unhappy about studying what is it
about this that causes suffering within
you and what you'll discover usually is
that what causes suffering in you is the
attachments to the thing the meaning
that your mind literally extracts from a
benign thing this is just a test I'm
literally studying mathematics that's
all I'm doing 2 + 2 is 4 that's it but
our mind attaches all this crap to it oh
my God if I get it wrong then I won't
get a good job if I don't get a good job
then I won't get a good marriage if I
don't get a good marriage then I won't
be happy in life and so what happens is
2 plus 2 equals 4 suddenly becomes your
mind attaches meaning to it that you are
[__] if you get this question wrong
but that's literally incorrect like
literally that is not correct it is all
of the rest it's a Hy hypothetical it's
not literal you all get that we attach
all of these things we construct these
things in our mind and that's the root
of our suffering how do we deconstruct
pay attention to your reactions because
that is those are the building blocks
your reactions to things what does this
mean to me and as you look within
yourself what you're going to be doing
is the very opposite of where we started
someone else is telling me I should do
this but I don't want to do this so I'm
going to suppress this and I'm going to
lean into whatever everybody else wants
that is the very opposite of looking
within yourself in fact it is shutting
down your ability to see within yourself
and this is the source of suffering now
this has nothing to do with God this is
what spirituality is simply an the study
of the self now people may Wonder but
then how the hell did this get
correlated with spiritual religion and
stuff in the first place for two reasons
so the reason spirituality got
correlated with religion is because when
people did this they discovered
something like God so as people people
started doing these meditative practices
and looking within themselves they
started activating parts of their brain
in unusual ways so chances are what
happened is they started inducing high
CO2 States within the brain normally
what happens when you have a high CO2
state is you die but if you train
Yourself by like being in the Himalayas
for 15 years and slowly reducing your
respiratory rate until you can tolerate
through sort of managing that lactic
acidosis through metabolic means there's
a whole physiology behind it which your
body can ramp up so it is no longer
lethal you start to create malfunctions
in the brain that are not harmful and
when you say malfunctions in the brain
what do you mean what I mean is Visual
and auditory hallucinations psychedelic
experiences but since these are not
induced by artificial drugs and you're
trained in in the ability to use your
mind your mind is a very sharpened
weapon that can cut through anything you
are able to handle that spiritual
experience and you see some kind of
connection to some greater being and so
the original practitioners of
spirituality became the source of
religion they were enlightened in some
way they had some kinds of spiritual
experiences the second thing that
happened is that as people made
discoveries they started passing these
down and that became codified into a
religion and Buddhism I think is the
best example of this where Buddha
explicitly did not start out to start a
religion you could make the same
argument for someone like Jesus right
I'm not an expert in Christian theology
or history for that matter and so when
these people this is the second thing
that happened is when people started to
discover the source of happiness and
lose I like conquer suffering basically
other human beings were like holy [__]
what did you figure out teach me how to
do that because you seem happy all the
time and you don't even have as much
money as I do this person is different
and so then they gravitate to that
person and then this person teaches them
and this becomes codified into a set of
practices that we then call religion and
then if you look at what goes wrong in
religion basic problem in religion is
that you've got someone who knows what
the [__] they're talking about and then
other people are like teach me bro or
teach me girl and you're like all right
and then you teach it to them and then
the original person dies the problem is
that unless there is a enlightened
person in the Next Generation someone
starts living by a script instead of
actually understanding they start paring
answers and so there's a decay in
knowledge and understanding which is how
religions go off track right you can
make an argument that a lot of religious
people nowadays don't even understand
the essence of the religion that they're
practicing it's turned into something
else because without the spirituality
religion becomes a husk of codes of
conduct without understanding and then
we get these really wild like
contradictions based on the roots of the
religion when someone is like yeah we're
about peace but I'm a kill you or we're
about compassion but [__] you because
these people don't have the spirituality
and so I don't think people sometimes
get upset about religion and stuff I
don't think religion is bad or good just
like anything else in this world science
isn't bad or good it's how we use it I
think the biggest problem with religion
is that we've lost a lot of spirituality
[Music]
there